[BLOG] add close encounter with pandas and the jedis of open source.md (#542)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/close-encounter-with-pandas-and-the-jedis-of-open-source.md

---
title: 'Close Encounter with pandas and the Jedis of open source'

> published: Novermber 1, 2022

Reviewer: ```suggestion
published: Novermber 14, 2022
```

communicator, secured an audience with some pandas maintainers and after a 
few comments from maintainers like [Joris Van den Bossche](https://github.com/jorisvandenbossche), 
[Richard Shadrach](https://github.com/rhshadrach) and [JHM Darbyshire](https://github.com/attack68), 
a better picture on what is expected and the best approach to fixing the issue was painted.

### Debugging, ain't like dusting crops

One of the most exciting parts of my internship has been learning how experienced developers went about 
debugging and solving problems. Jaime held a live-coding section where he did exactly that with a project 
he was working on for conda forge. It was an issue with errors on the CI (continuous integration) that 
wasn't reproducible on his local machine. He had a list of hypotheses and he meticulously updated this 
list as new information was presented from each fix he attempted. It was obvious that "*the force is strong 
with this one*" and I had so much fun learning and laughing at both the situation and his jokes (he's a 
very funny jedi 😆). 

Aaron had a very particular way of seeing a problem and accessing a possible solution. It involved looking 

> at how other packages handled similar problems, trying out examples (using toys as Noa once mentioned), 

Reviewer: Hmm, I may have used the term [Toy Problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toy_problem) to denote a simple (or simplified) use case? Is that what you meant here, or did I refer to actual toys?!

Author: I think it was more of a Toy Program. Just like small scripts to test out an idea. I can totally change that to a simpler term (maybe I was projecting, although I have actually not heard the term used before).

corrupt law enforcement officers (a daily struggle in my country) and an immediate mandate to return back to school 
(thrust me straight into exams) after seven months of industrial strike action. Fortunately for me, through the 
help of my mentors, I got an extension on my internship (more time to focus on writing this blog and closing all 
open issues). I am working on writing internal documentation for GroupBy. GroupBy is a big part of pandas and this 
issue proved to be tougher than I thought as internal documentation requires some background knowledge of the 
thought process adopted at the time when a feature was been implemented (these are usually hinted at with comments 
in the code but still they aren't always sufficient in providing clarity).

The internship might have come to an end, with me writing this blog, but the journey from Tatooine is only just 
beginning. I intend to maintain a relationship with my mentors at Quansight and the maintainers at pandas.

It really has been a journey of enlightenment, knowledge, fun, connection, growth, and Force Awakening. 

> I have a greater appreciation now for maintainers in Open Source and I hope to become a major maintainer myself someday. *"It's like poetry, they rhythm"*.😉

Reviewer 2: Hadn't heard this quote before. It seems it should be "rhyme", not "rhythm". Maybe you can link the quote to the video for context.

```suggestion
I have a greater appreciation now for maintainers in Open Source and I hope to become a major maintainer myself someday. [*"It's like poetry, they rhyme"*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yFqFLo_bYq0).😉
```

There was a need to understand what was expected and having read the already cold discussion on the issue 
to maintain consistency for panda's operation on empty inputs, It turned out though that there haven't 
been many tests written on empty inputs and some of the results are a little unpredictable. For example, given

```python
    import pandas as pd

    empty_df = pd.DataFrame({"a": [], "b": []})
    gb = empty_df.groupby("a", group_keys=True)
    group = getattr(gb, "b")
    group.apply("sum") # Returns an empty series, which is understandable since the group is empty.
    # But trying to get a sample of an empty group, returns an error
    group.sample() # Returns ValueError: need at least one array to concatenate

```
Making this discovery was only possible because my mentors had advised me to create a list of pandas 
operations and tested them with empty inputs. It was really brilliant because it gave a very clear picture 
of the various inconsistencies in handling empty inputs and allowed for interest in the issue to be 
rekindled. Here's a cutout from the table showing some GroupBy methods acting on empty dataframes.

> <table>

Reviewer 3: Hi @Th3nn3ss! I see you already removed the style attributes. In general, I recommend against using HTML or inline styles. I recommend markup over HTML because it's easier for other people to read and edit as necessary. And I recommend against inline styles because it makes it harder for us to later change the look-and-feel of the website if components are inline styled.

But, if you really really need to use HTML tags and inline styles, then because this is a `.mdx` file you have to use [JSX](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html), which is similar to HTML but not quite. For example, in order to use inline styles, you have to write it like so:

```jsx
<table style={{padding: "10px"}}>
```

Author: Thanks @gabalafou, I have tried using a markdown table instead, like the other mentors mentioned, but can't seem to get it to work. Code blocks with multiple lines don't tend to work inside table rows. Maybe am doing it wrong. Do you have a way I can overcome the issue with embedding code-blocks (with multiple lines) inside markdown table rows? I will really like to avoid any future issues with using HTML tags.

Reviewer 3: I'll take a look at this right now.
